compare at that time, the students at UT and the students here?
I'm not convinced that people at Texas were any better.
I had a lot of bad students there.
I had, I gave grades in the 45 and the 50 realm.
I had trouble with athletes there.
I had trouble with sorority girls, sorority and fraternity guys.
So that was not new.
So that was nothing different than the Corps.
I think probably we had more bad students here
because, as I recollect, it was almost open admissions.
So we had more bad students here, but I think I had as many good students.
I had a lot of good students, and I don't have any bad students at Texas, but I thought, again, probably more weaker students here.
Do you remember any early experiences with the students that seemed unique to A&M, either plus or minus, funny or serious?
Well, when a student was in trouble or having problems, you more likely had their mother and father there with you.
I don't know if I've ever saw a mother and father in Texas.
My three years teaching there, I'm not sure ever a parent came in to talk to me.
Very quickly at A&M, I had lots of parents come in, good and bad, and indifferent.
Give some examples.
Well, I had a student one time that...
failed the course and it cut a great deal and a knock on my door one day and there I looked up and there this man was standing there very angry looking with a wife who looked like she didn't want to be there and this student they came in and sat down his father was rather belligerent and his father was ready to take me to task and so I said well excuse me sir let me see here let me get my grade book out so I got my grade book out and I began by saying well he could hardly expect to do too well if he's cut 25 times
And I started talking to the father.
And as I talked to the gentleman, his face began to change.
And he quit looking at me some and kept looking at the son.
Before our meeting was over, he was so angry I had his son that you could see he was just furious.
And his mother, the woman, the lady, was in tears.
And his father told me this.
I remember very, very clearly.
He said, I waited tables and worked my way through A&M.
I had no money at all.
He said, I sent my son here.
I wanted my son to not have the problems I had, deprivation I had.
I want him to enjoy college.
And he's done this to me.
And they got up and walked out.
As far as you, had he flunked out?
Oh, I don't think he flunked out, but he had flunked my course.
And I think he had flunked out, yes.
One of the things is, Father, I talked to him some, and I said, well, maybe you need to do a little while in the military, you know.
I said, some students are just too young for college.
They need to perhaps settle down some.
And I really felt sorry for the boy.
By the time I was all over with, I knew the young man was about to get it.
He really get it.
And I really felt sorry for him.
And the father, by the way, I bought him this, I bought him that.
Didn't have a car, but everything else, you know, that you could want.
In those early years, did any of the students try to do anything that was unique to A&M?
Did they try to pull the wool over your eyes?
Oh gosh, you always had operators.
Okay.
And you always had those who gave you sob stories and problems.
And I think that's endemic with any, I don't think A&M students are any different than that.
When I taught at Texas those three years, and we had, as teaching people, I had complete control over the class.
We controlled it.
We gave the grades.
And I remember very clearly, when I was at Texas, I had football coaches try to interfere with grades.
And again, as I said, I wasn't going to tilt windmills.
I went to see Dr. Franz in those days.
And I asked Dr. Franz, what should I do?
And Dr. Fran said, did he fail?
And I said, yes, sir.
And Dr. Fran said, if he calls you back, not, he said, call, have him call me.
And I never heard any more about it then.
Did any of the, in the early years, did any students ever try to play any tricks on you?
Oh, yes.
You always had people trying to cheat and things like that, looking at all the papers.
And, of course, in those days, I don't know why they did it.
They had broken offices sometimes.
And the breaking was so obvious.
After all, if you had an exam there and they broke into your office, you very clearly weren't going to give that same exam again.
Did anybody break into your office?
One time.
Well, no, I haven't had anyone break into my office.
They broke into a number of other people's offices, never broke into mine.
Several times they would, sometimes students can be so dumb, I had a number of political cartoons on my door one time, and anyone with any brains could have seen in most of those cartoons poke fun at liberals, not conservatives,
And some dummy coming one day and tore them all off and wrote me notes saying he was tired of this liberal stuff.
And it made me wonder what we were doing with our students here if he thought that was liberal trife.
It was hardly that.
Don't I remember some kind of little incident where Dr. Nance one night or one early one morning caught some students going through the dumpster?
Yes, for exams.
You hear that story, yeah.
Yeah, but I don't remember any more about it.
I just remember he did it.
I also remember Dr. Nance is the one who caught the
who caught the grade changes.
There was a student in the registrar's office who for a fee would change your grade and there was a good bit of that going on and the way and it might have gone on forever but there was this one particular student that had been very nasty to Dr. Nance about a grade and so he stuck in Nance's mind and also Dr. Nance looked up one day and saw that this student was getting ready to graduate
Well, how could this student graduate when he never passed 105, 106?
And so Dr. Nast then looked into it and discovered that the student had made passing grades in 105, 106.
That couldn't be.
And so the investigation began, and they discovered that there was some real skullduggery going on.
Let's make believe this is the first day of class in one of your survey courses.
What was your routine on that first day?
What kind of description of the course and what kind of rules did you try to get across that day?
Didn't give out a syllabus in those days.
They were not required.
I didn't have a syllabus a little later on.
I did hand out a little simple sheet which simply said that
I expect them to come to class, that class attendants could be rewarded, and they shouldn't sleep in class, but not really very much.
And I told them what the class was about.
And in those days, classes were quite small, and so I encouraged question asking.
one thing I always stress with them don't jump ahead it's irritating for you wait to get past the point before you ask me a question if I don't cover something I don't mind you asking about it but wait till I've had a chance to cover it but we didn't give out much in those days because there weren't any legal questions about that it's not until later on when there were so many legal questions coming up and students were prone to sue or to claim they weren't treated fairly that we started giving out very direct
What was your grading system?
Did you grade on the curve or?
No, but yes.
If you mean I would assign a certain percentage of grades and drop down to a level to pass everybody, no I did not do that.
But I did use
I did use attendance and things like that then to curve grades somewhat.
I didn't ever approve of grading because after all classes varied and you can have a good class and have a bad class, therefore to grade a good class up to
down to a bad class I thought was unfair.
We had a lot of F's in those days.
Back in those days it was not unusual to run 20 to 40 percent.
That's why I say we had open admissions almost and we had a lot of small town kids in those days.
I think nowadays our student buys large a big city.
But in those days we had lots of kids from small schools that were ill prepared to come to college.
And as I said up to 40 percent F's by some people.
What about some of the sob stories you heard in those early years?
Oh, sob stories were really, well, grandmothers died, grandfathers died.
They had to go home and work on a farm.
They had to go home and work.
There was a death in the family.
We got those things pretty regularly.
I'm sick.
I'm ill.
I learned to be very careful on those things because I had a young lady come up one day and said she was ill and had to go home.
This was on a Thanksgiving holiday, and she wanted to leave a day early.
The attitude in those days was I didn't care when you cut.
I didn't care whether you cut for a holiday or not.
A cut was a cut, so save your cuts and do it.
And she went home and died, and so that made me very careful about how I talked to students about whether they were sick or not, and that happened fairly early.
when girls were admitted here.
Now, Grage was posted publicly then on your door.
They were posted on your door, and you could see who it was right then and there, yes.
And did you ever have any experiences after they saw the posting?
Oh, I've had a lot of students come in and complain one way or the other.
I've never had anyone complain that they were posted.
That was something you just accepted, and they were posted.
Students would come in and complain about grades.
I've had students complain about grades, about what they had or what they didn't have.
And I tried to keep a pretty accurate grade book, and I kept attendance, which I think helped whenever a student came in.
Did you ever turn to any of your colleagues in those early years for advice?
Yes.
I ask advice.
I had probably one time with some international students and I remember Chuck McCandless back in those days was one of the assistants and so I really felt they should get an F but on the other hand
I didn't want to do anything to rock the whole boat, and so I talked to McCannis about that, and I finally decided to go ahead and give him an effective WP.
I wouldn't give him a passing grade, but I gave him a WP.
And yes, I talked to people about possibilities, and I talked to Nance, actually.
There was a case where I was giving a failing grade to a rather important person,
Again, I didn't want to do anything, so I went and asked him what I should do, what he suggested I do.
And he said, well, is there any way that that person can pass if you lower your grading system?
And I said, I'll have to pass everybody.
He said, well, pay that student, and I did.
So Dr. Nance would not want to be bought.
In those early years, do you remember any board member or politician or other public figure trying to pull a string?
No, I never had that.
I had faculty members, football coaches, and people like that at times.
Yes, I had a number of those, but I never had anyone on that level, no.
Give some examples that you remember.
Well, I had several instances where faculty members called and talked to me about their child, about how their child should have gotten a better grade, or why didn't they get a better grade, and things like that then.
And when I first came here, Bud Denton was the football man.
He always came by to talk to you before everything happened.
And so you never felt that Bud was trying to finagle grades from you.
But some of the people following Bud very definitely tried to do that then.
Did some people representing athletics ever try to get you to give a student grade they did not deserve?
Yeah.
I've talked about couldn't they do this, do that, you know, important people.
Bud Denton never did it, but I had others do that.
Now, that was only a period of time for a while there.
And then as time went on, that did not occur.
Now, you mentioned a while ago you got involved taking up tickets and so forth, the football game.
How did, how and when did that start?
Well, several of my colleagues, I recollect Monroe and Bayless were already doing it, and so I talked to them so that I would do it, so I asked and got on then.
That would have been, I guess, 67, 66, very early I started doing it.
What was your first task?
My first task was taking up student tickets.
That was the lowest job.
And I did that, and then I was voted, and luckily I went into the president's box.
And I worked in the president's box for a long time.
Do you remember with whom that started?
Well, Rudder was president, yeah.
Rudder was still president.
Yes, Rudder was president.
I can remember so clearly that game where Texas beat us the worst ever beating us was 50 to something.
Texas had a really good team that year, and that must have been at 67, 68, and the Texas band and Rudder got up and when the Texas band was marching and made some Rudder march, they're not going to beat us in football, they're trying to beat us in band, you know, and that's a long time ago.
Do you remember any Rudder press box experiences, plus or minus?
No, Rudder was very friendly to press box, and I can remember he'd have particularly
Uh, Rudder would, Rudder sat a good bit you see in the press, that was a Board of Regents box.
But in those days, that big top thing had not been added yet.
That was not added yet.
They added a second deck, you know, and that wasn't that good of a thing up there.
Remember, you're working.
And so Reuters spent a lot of time down in what has now become the Board of Regents box.
It was the President's box back in those days, if I'm remembering correctly.
That box A and B on the 50-yard line on the west side was called the President's box.
It's now the Board of Regents box, and the President is upstairs in that big fancy one up there.
Because this is before the second deck was built, certainly before the third.
Yeah.
We won, well, we won conference in 67, and then that was planned then to add the second deck, and then the second deck was added, and then the third deck was a good bit later then.
Any memories of that 67 year and the excitement that young Coach Stallings created?
Yes, and I went to, we went to Cotton Bowl and saw A&M beat Alabama,
And colder and blue blazes, as I remember.
And we barely won it, you know.
We were on the ropes on one game.
I remember we were almost about ready to lose to TCU.
But Billy Hobbs, who was a famous football player, TCU was driving for another touchdown, which I think finished the game.
Because back in those days, we didn't score these 30 and 40 points.
And Billy Hobbs intercepted a pass.
And we went on to score and cut the score down, and then we went on to win.
Did you ever have any personal communication relations with Stallings?
Well, I spoke to him, and I, one year we were, Bob Calvert and I were invited to go with the team over to play Texas, and we did that.
And other than seeing, back in those days, because everyone went to coffee, you know, in the old Memorial Student Center Union, and you saw Stallings there, and you might speak to him, but I was not close to him, no.
What about the basketball coach at that point?
Got to know him better.
Describe Shelby.
Well, Shelby might be referred to as being folksy and kind of down-to-earth, and he cultivated that idea, a good old country boy and fisherman.
And I think that in the early days, when we were so good in basketball, he, Shelby, deliberately, I think, recruited the type of players he thought he could work with.
And back in those days, I think it worked very well.
I think if I had to say anything about Shelby, I thought he had the possibility to take good people and make them into very good people.
He got the most out of his players.
I'm not sure if Shelby ever knew how to coach really good players.
I think that they're really good players, Shelby couldn't understand.
But he could take a mediocre player and get the most out of him.
And you began working also at basketball.
I worked at basketball very early, yes.
Describe a game in G. Riley White in those days.
Well, we frequently had sellouts, of course.
We frequently had 7,000 people there.
It was noisy.
Every team never talked.
Talked about how noisy it was at G. Raleigh White.
Why was it noisy?
Well, you know, just kind of a box in there, and there's nothing to absorb the
There was no kind of insulation up above, just steel girders.
Was there any musical organization?
Yes, the band played.
Of course, the band, we were unique in that.
The band came and played.
That's before they had the girls dancing now.
There weren't any girls dancing, but the band played, and it played loud.
It sat in the very southeast corner of the, of G. Riley White.
And of course, the students were led in yells.
It was an orderly thing.
It was noisy.
Do you remember ever any disorder in one of those?
Yes.
One in particular was the Baylor ball game back in that time when there was a fight.
One of the Baylor ball players, I don't remember his name now, was known to be a feisty player.
And one of the Yankees was going down for a layup, and the Baylor guy trailed him.
And the Baylor guy did not try to block the ball.
The Baylor boy blocked the guy.
And unfortunately for him, in those days, right there underneath that basket, all the athletes sat.
And people think it was the athletes who did it, but one of the big basketball players back in the other days who could play football, really Bob Barnett was trailing the play.
When he saw his comrade really just cold-cotted by this Baylor boy, everything got him angry.
And so he then proceeded to level the Baylor guy.
and it was a bench-empting brawl kind of and it was on TV and no one really could be sure of what happened because it all happened so quickly.
I helped to break it up.
I was working right there and so I went out on the court and helped separate people out and I saw it all happen pretty quickly and actually the worst damage was probably done because the Baylor kid was hit and then his head hit the floor and that's a hard floor.
I've always thought that Billy Bob ought to have a tape of that fight that he would play at his beer hall, or whatever it's called, up at Fort Worth as you walk in, so you'd know that this is the same Billy Bob.
Who were Shelby's favorite teams to beat, do you think, during that era?
His favorite competitors?
Well, he hated Arkansas, so he just liked Arkansas.
But, of course, he had a winning record against Texas.
He's had a good winning record against Texas.
And there's no love lost.
While Arkansas and Texas may have been the main enemies, in a way, there wasn't much love lost between us and Baylor either.
They were so close.
And A&M had been involved in a number of altercations with Baylor.
But I think he particularly enjoyed beating Eddie Sutton.
Yeah.
And then who was that Texas coach?
Abe Lemons.
Abe Lemons, yeah.
And Sutton hated to play at the A&M, you know.
He said it was the worst place in the world to play.
All right, for on the night of a basketball game, what was your routine?
By what time did you get there?
I had to be there by 5 o'clock most of the time, or 5.30, so I frequently, I stayed in the office, then I walked over and ate at the MSC, and I went to the game then.
And took up tickets?
Took up tickets.
And then when would that
We didn't take up tickets.
We punched.
Back in those days, you had a card that you punched, and you punched it.
And then what time would that function be over relative to the game?
The game started at 7.30.
So you could quit that?
No, I had to stay through the whole game, really.
Oh, really?
But generally speaking, we were free after the fourth quarter or the last ten minutes of the ballgame.
But did you come in and sit down?
Yes.
We rotated.
We had to keep somebody in the door.
Once the tickets were taken up,
We'd rotate off and we'd go watch.
We might have as many as three to four people on the student door, so we could leave one or two there and go watch the game.
Now, you mentioned parking.
Describe parking situation for a history faculty member in the early years.
Oh, it was terrible.
We just drove up to Denego Hall and parked our car and got out and walked in the office.
It was terrible in those days.
Do you remember a parking sticker?
Did we have stickers then?
I don't remember.
Come to think about it, I really don't remember.
But there wasn't a single reserve slot, was there?
I don't think so, no.
Dr. Nance just parked.
He got there so early.
He had a great big old Chrysler's, I remember.
And he just parked it.
And you parked wherever you could.
And I don't remember that lot
being so full that we couldn't... No, it wasn't, yeah.
On weekends, students living in a hard hall, that dorm right there would frequently come into it.
But I seldom had a problem getting any parking place.
I agree.
All right, let's see.
Now let's go back to family.
Joanne comes bringing son number one and son number two.
She was born here.
And when does she go to work here?
Well,
Like many women, I don't know, post-pregnancy, women have, I understand, as you keep saying, women frequently have a letdown after they have a baby.
And she decided maybe she needed something to do.
So first she took in typing.
She was doing some typing.
She knew somebody engineering, and she did typing.
And in the beginning, she was doing a lot of typing for international students.
And that drove her a while because she, not only was she typing, she was editing.
And she wasn't being paid to edit.
She was being just paid to type.
And so she decided at a point that if she could do that much work, she might as well go to work.
So she went to work half time for the engineering college.
And then an opening came up in the Research Foundation, which was integrated, a part of
the engineering college at that time.
And so she went to work for the Research Foundation, first half-time, then three-fourths time, then full-time.
And her first duties was what, as a half-time?
Her first duties was simply general clerical work.
Just general clerical.
No real responsibility, just general clerical.
And about when was that?
Oh, I suppose about sixty, probably sixty-five.
See, our boy was born in sixty-four, and she took in typing for
for a year or so.
And she works, has worked for them ever since and became the, what's her current title?
She is the president and our general CEO.
When did she assume that responsibility?
About 10 years ago.
She'd been president about 10 years.
So she worked her way up from a part-time... From part-time.
To the president, yeah.
In 20 years?
Yes.
She's worked for 30 years now.
No, but within 20 years.
And I want to interview her about sometime in the future.
Did you ever get the impression that she ever thought...
that she was given any advantage because she was female.
No, I think she really felt that it was the opposite, really.
She wasn't being treated fairly because she was a female, you know.
And if anything, it was a disadvantage.
Yeah, a disadvantage, yes.
In that era.
And the fact that you were a faculty member had nothing to do with her getting that job over there.
No, nothing to do with it.
That's what I, that was neither a plus nor a minus.
All right, back to the history department.
You were a full-time faculty member teaching, teaching, teaching, and you finished your degree, your doctoral dissertation when?
1967.
67.
66, no, yeah, 66, yeah.
And did that change your work assignment in any way?
No, not at all.
And so Dr. Nance retires
About when?
Oh gosh.
as department head?
We moved into academic building, and he retired shortly thereafter.
So, what's that?
Middle 70s, I guess.
Okay.
So it's maybe 10 years at least.
Yes.
He's head of the department for 12, 15 years after I come here.
As he nears retirement, did his routine of leadership change much?
Yes, a lot.
When I first came,
it was more individual decisions and pretty harsh like being called in and told I couldn't wear short pants and a number of people were let go because they got crosswise with him.
One department member was let go mainly because he kept wearing t-shirts to class and Dr. Nance thought that was inappropriate and individual people were let go.
How much he consulted on that
I have no idea, but I do know that by the time he left the department, when he left being head, of course he worked a while longer thereafter, he was consulting.
I know he was consulting a lot with people.
Who would have been the ones he would consult with much?
Boyd Taylor, Herb Lang, Claude Hall, perhaps even you.
He would go into, I know the full professors.
I do know the full professors were talked to.
and questions were asked about doing certain things on hiring and firing and things like that then.
Now, during his years, early years, when did you find out what courses you were teaching at what hours?
Frequently the day before class, yes.
Not very early.
Do you remember any years in which you got a real surprise?
Yes, I had been teaching 105, 106 forever, and all the courses I could teach were taken, Texas history, the Old South,
the early national period, which were my strengths, where I had people in them who were going to stay there a while.
And we had a gentleman here and he left.
And he taught a course in those days called Roosevelt to Roosevelt.
It was 310.
Roosevelt to Roosevelt.
And he leaves very suddenly.
He gets a job and decides to leave.
And I don't know, just a few days before classes begin, Dr. Vance called me in and said, Victor, would you like to teach
310.
Well I was tired.
I didn't know anything.
I had never had a course hardly after 1900.
Nothing had happened since the Civil War and so of course I said eagerly yes sir and I went home right then and there and began to read and I taught 310 for a good many years.
Then when Dr. Monroe left the department I then fell heir to
450 the Old South and also by that time Texas history had really increased and we were adding a whole bunch of sections.
I won't say why it increased but it did and so I started teaching Texas history as well.
You say you won't say or you don't know why?
Well I know why.
Why?
Dr. Nance was a strict disciplinarian and he ran classes really tough
And students didn't want to take Texas history unless they had to.
So many people who took Texas history were those students certifying to teach.
And they had to take it.
Therefore, the classes remained fairly small.
When Dr. Nance retired, there was a, and we started offering Texas history to other people, including me, we taught it less strictly.
and we taught it more like we taught 105.
Dr. Nance, it was 326.
It was an advanced course and Dr. Nance taught it almost like a graduate course until students were deathly afraid of it for some reason.
And when the rest of us began teaching it, we taught like a survey course and all of a sudden students wanted to take it.
Also, it was ruled
a ruling was made.
In the early days, the ruling was you must take 105, 106 to fulfill the state requirement.
If you remember, the state requirement was you must have six hours and at least three of basic American history.
And we here at A&M, and I think that was mainly Dr. Nance, construed that to mean it must be 105, 106.
When Dr. Nance left, those powers that be began to look at any
American history course would suffice.
In the early days, we said if one was a survey, you'd take anything you want.
And Texas history then was looked upon as a survey course, and a lot of people started taking it.
We were teaching many five courses when I retired.
In those early years, what were supposedly, according to the students, what were supposedly the easiest and hardest history courses?
Well, Texas history was considered one of the hardest, and it was
really tough in many ways.
Many students and I want to take medieval history because of problems there.
Most popular classes would have been Civil War and Reconstruction under Ashcraft.
It's not that Ashcraft was easy because he was not, but he taught it in a very pleasant way and he enjoyed it.
Herb Lang taught
a Western history actually at the Frontier and that was a very popular course and students enjoyed that.
And I think Claude Hall also, his class on Jacksonville America was quite popular at the time.
And the Old South taught by Hathaway Monroe was a popular course but all those courses were taught in a general way and there was not a lot of discipline in them and the readings were reasonable.
What about the courses taught by Ivy League Taylor?
Well, students who got to know him liked him.
But most students were deathly afraid of him because of the way he acted.
And in class, he ran class really, you know, he was really a, well, he was simply the boss.
Autonomy, that was it.
And that frightened students.
In reality, if you took the class and got to know him,
Lloyd, he really wasn't that bad.
He had a bad bark and he kept small classes that way.
His term papers were fearsome because he required you to write and to make corrections and that's what scared law students away.
Why did they call him Ivy League?